---
layout: post
category: circle
title: "*The Circle* and Transparency"
---
I'll be responding to prompt 2, and discussing The Circle's three mantras: "Secrets are Lies," "Sharing is Caring, " and "Privacy is Theft."

Although these mantras may seem very tempting (and I'll explain why they might be tempting later), I firmly believe that they are unequivocally wrong and destructive to society as a whole. 

Let's start with the first one, "Secrets are Lies." Bailey says that secrets "fester" within somone until they are shared and put out in the open, and that hiding a secret from someone is the same thing as lying to them. But, no matter how idealistic one may try to be, one must realize that secrets have a necessary place in society. I'm not talking about hiding from your spouse that you cheated on them. It's things like your feelings about someone or something that you withold, not out of malice, but out of tact. Sometimes it's best to keep your mouth shut, either because you know that what you'll say will cause unnecessary strife, or because, like all humans, you know you're fallible and may change your mind. It's better to be cautious and keep your thoughts to yourself for some topics until you get more information or have more time to consider the consequences of sharing a secret. Sometimes people say things in confidentiality because they know what they tell you might not be "good," but because they still need your advice and help. By forcing people to not have secrets about anything, we'd be living in a world without tact and without the ability to treat delicate matters with the cautiousness and confidentiality they deserve. Relationships would be ruined by minor things that would never become an issue otherwise. Sometimes one needs to keep something to themselves.

On to "Sharing is Caring." This one is very similar to the above one. Things don't need to be shared, especially if they're linked to highly emotional topics, like an illness. Bailey says that these types of things need to be "demystified" and moved away from shame. But people don't withhold from sharing things just because they're ashamed. They don't share them because they simply think that other people don't need to know. In reality, most people do not need to know at all about certain illnesses or other personal matters. It's not about "demystifing" those things, it's just a matter of only letting those who actually deserve to know and care to know about personal matters. On the topic of Mae's kayaking, and not wanting to share her experience (and later breaking the law and wanting to hide it), it's silly to argue that not sharing all of one's experiences is wrong. Nobody is entitled to your experiences. They're yours. That's what makes them special.

Finally, we have "Privacy is Theft." Bailey makes the argument that without privacy, people would never do bad things, because they'd never even have a chocie to do anything due to not having any privacy. That idea is incredibly dangerous. Although it's true that when people are aware that they're being watched they're less likely to commit crimes, it's also true that when a society has a feeling of being watched or controlled, they moderate their actions to be conformist and subdued. We'd have no protests about injustices, no great thinkers standing up to speak new ideas, and no societal change. When people are forced to conform because they feel like they're always being watched and judged, we lose our sense of individuality and thus lose a little bit of our humanity. We are not a herd to be controlled. Privacy is essential for the freedom of expression.

These ideas may seem tantilizing, because, as Bailey argues, they could lead to less crime, a better ability to experience interesting and exciting things, and perhaps a more accepting and understanding society on certain issues, the negatives and conformity far outweigh the positives. 