---
layout: post
category: circle
title: "A Response to Zadie Smith"
---
Facebook is a superficial timewaster. I know this fact, and I think the majority of my generation also knows it. The irony of Smith's critique of Facebook is that she assumes the primary victims are the generation "below" her, those of Zuckerberg's age and younger, when in reality, Facebook is evermore becoming a tool for those of her own generation. I can't remember the last time I made a list of interests, or posted a status update, or even scrolled through my newsfeed. I sometimes update my profile picture, but that's just a matter of staying current. For me, Facebook is useful for messaging people (usually about school) when I don't have their phone number. Or, I use it to join groups (again, mostly related school) to get updates about events or to ask questions. I may be in the minority, but my feeling is that Smith's analyzation of Facebook and its users is a bit dated. The article was written in 2010, and while many of the things written were probably true then, six years later, Facebook is a bit different. It's now my dad that posts statuses that gain dozens of likes, comments, and shares.

Moving past the shifting of the Facebook user landscape, I entirely agree with Smith's characterization of those who *do* still use Facebook, and, to an extent, other social media and her dissection of the birth and purpose of Facebook. I watched the Social Network, and, while I enjoyed it thoroughly, the real Mark Zuckerberg is not Aaron Sorkin's Mark Zuckerberg. Smith hits the nail on the head with her description: "Controlled but dull, bright and clean but uniformly plain, nonideological, affectless." That's the sense you get when you visit a Facebook profile that actually has been fleshed out in the full "Zuckerberg" way. A neat list of interests. Selected favorite photos. Maybe even a short bio. It's false; it doesn't tell you if you'd like this person in real life. I crave authenticity in relationships. The "phony" online personas that people portray, whether it be selected pictures on Instagram or curated views on Facebook, don't appeal to me. The best connections are made in person, intimately. 

Now, on to The Circle. It's obvious that Eggers is setting up The Circle to be a hyperbolic expansion of Facebook, and Instagram, and Snapchat, and any other social media, a juggernaut expanded beyond control or boundary. Yet, it's not too far from being accurate. Much like you can misinterpret what someone is like based on what they've "liked" on Facebook, Mae is shoehorned into a Portugal group simply based on years-old pictures. The way Mae obsessively increases her PartiRank reminded me of certain people I've seen mindlessly tapping through 30-40 Snapchats, sending the exact same bored face in response. It's connection without substance, and it's what Eggers and Smith warn against. Zuckerberg simply wants "connection," but if the connections are weak, then they're meaningless. I get the feeling that Eggers is in agreement with me about the best way to make connections—in personal, intimate settings. Mae is most drawn to those she meets in those situations—Kalden and Francis—and we are most drawn to Mae when she's kayaking because we get to see her at one of her most private moments. 

It's this intimacy that The Circle and Facebook are really trying to create between people. We see this idea when Mae is chastized for not wanting to share *all* her experiences with other people, and in Facebook's efforts to allow people to share more, and more. In The Circle's case, it's nefarious, while I tend to think (perhaps naively) that Facebook is more, just, optimistic. Regardless, it's an impossible task. 

I'm afraid I may have been too harsh on social media. It's a great tool for easily rekindling past connections, or to just have fun and waste time. Humans don't have to be deep and introspective *always*. We're allowed to sometimes be superficial, to just send a funny face to a friend, or to share a picture because we think we look cute in it. It's when this attitude consumes our life, like it rapidly is doing to Mae, that it becomes an issue. It's when young, impressionable people start to believe the harsh comments on their posts, or when people begin to base their self-validation on how many likes their photo gets, that we need to reach out and let those people know there's more to life than what's on the screen. Social media can be fun and harmless, but we need to stay pragmatic about where its limits are.

Overall, I think Smith is too scathing of Facebook. It doesn't have to be a zero sum game. We can have great, personal relationships that are also sustained and expanded through social media. While the overwhelming nature of The Circle looks scary, I doubt we'll go that far, as long as we remember that people exist in real life too. 

But I've gotta go now, I have some Snapchats to respond to. 